Justin Bieber Muhammad Ali Miley Cyrus
and then there's murderers rapists
arsonists I probably have seen more
brains than anybody in the world and now
your brain so this is going to be really
hard for you you have ADHD really Dr
Daniel Aon the world's leading expert on
the brain Dr aon's mission is to end
mental illness by creating a revolution
in brain health buckle up Dr Aon let me
know what you see your brain is involved
in everything you do and after today you
will always care about your brain what
things make the brain worse drugs
alcohol not getting good sleep sugar
fruit juice eitting a soccer ball with
your head caffeine caffeine it shrinks
it what's bad about sugar you're more
likely get obesity and as your weight
goes up the actual physical size and
function of your brain goes down that
should scare the fat off anyone and then
there's social media if you're on 3 and
1/2 hours a day you begin to wear out
those pleasure centers that bring you
happiness and they bring you pleasure
and they bring you drive you thrill them
to death but you're not stuck with the
brain you have you can make it better I
can prove it so it starts with let's
look at my brain let's do this we have
evidence of and that's normal in our
society the problem is two or three of
those can impact the rest of your life
and nobody knows about it
quick one this is really really
fascinating to me on the back end of our
YouTube channel it says that
69.9% of you that watch this channel
frequently over the lifetime of this
channel haven't yet hit the Subscribe
button I just wanted to ask you a favor
it helps this channel so much if you
choose to subscribe helps us scale the
guest helps us scale the production and
it makes this show bigger so if I could
ask you for one favor if you've watched
the show before and you've enjoyed it
and you like this episode that you're
currently watching could you please hit
the Subscribe button thank you so much
and I repay that gesture by making sure
that everything we do here gets better
and better and better and better that is
a promise I'm willing to make you do we
have a
[Music]
deal Dr Aon if someone's just clicked on
this
podcast and they're considering sticking
around or maybe doing something else
with their time can you explain to me
BAS B on what you know that we're going
to be discussing and the subject matter
we're going to be discussing and how
important it
is the benefit to their life if they
stick
around 10 extra years of cognitive
performance in their life uh better love
better money Better Health because your
brain we're going to talk about is
involved in everything you do how you
think how you feel how you act how you
get along with other people and my goal
is to end it's going to sound huge and
it
is and it's going to sound impossible
but it's not my goal is to end mental
illness by
creating a revolution in brain health I
hate the term mental illness it shames
people it's stigmatizing and it's wrong
these things aren't mental disorders
they're brain disorders if you get your
brain healthy well your mind tends to
follow so you're depressed an
anti-depressant is not doing one thing
for getting your brain healthy nobody's
talking to you about your diet your
level of exercise your sleep not living
in a mold filled home not really
allowing your kids to hit soccer balls
with their head right because that's not
brain
healthy and if we can create this
revolution in brain health the incidence
of mental health disorders will go down
by
half and I guess that's part of the
reveal here is you've actually scanned
my brain and you're going to tell me
today the results that you have on your
laptop over there in the corner of the
room so I came to your clinic in Los
Angeles and they made me do a test on a
computer like it was almost like a speed
test of sorts and then they made me lie
down in a big machine for about how long
was that about 30 minutes 15 minutes 15
minutes while this big machine rotated
around my head and looked at my brain
that was my experience of what happened
and then I filled out some
questionnaires about myself and my brain
and my life generally and from that all
that data feeds into the thing you're
about to show me now yes so I never will
make a
diagnosis from a scan okay I make a
diagnosis from all the information which
is why we had you fell out all that
information and I gave you a test called
the Connor's continuous performance test
which is a 15minute test of attention
and every time you see a letter you hit
the space bar except when you see the
letter X when you see the letter X you
don't do anything so it measures impulse
control and inhibition response
time and you actually did fine on the
test and but there's other evidence that
you might in fact have ADD or ADHD from
getting bored easily to poor handwriting
being
disorganized and so on uh and obviously
you're very bright but struggled a bit
in school so with all of that
information um first thing to do is look
at a healthy scan so we know what a
healthy scan looks like and we're going
to show it in two different ways we're
to look at the outside surface of your
brain so a healthy one is the image on
the left and all we should see is full
even symmetrical activity so the image
on the top left is looking underneath
the brain so the top is the front part
of the brain the bottom is the back the
top is an area called the prefrontal
cortex hugely important in humans
largest in humans than any other animal
by far it's 30% of the human brain 11%
of the chimpanzee brain and then the
back is the cerebellum back bottom part
of the brain um again very important
involved in processing speed
the bottom right of the images on the
left is looking down from the top uh the
other two looking at the brain from the
side color doesn't matter it's the shape
it should be full even and symmetrical
the images on the right the color
matters so it's what we call our active
images blue is average activity red is
the top
15% white is the top 8% and see all the
white so the white is where things are
really happening it's really hot okay
and that's healthy that's normal and
that's going to become very important
for you so if we look at your brain it's
a little bumpy and so I'll ask you about
toxins there anything toxic in your life
what what are toxins so think alcohol
marijuana
mold the heavy metals in your your body
infections and so it's not alcohol or
drugs then I begin to go have you ever
lived in a mold filled environment maybe
we should test you for that do you have
more mercury in your body or lead in
your body than you should so for example
I had very high mercury levels my brain
sort of looked like that when I first
scanned it it was toxic and I had very
high mercury levels like I never drank I
just don't like it never smoked never
did drugs but my brain looked toxic and
so you then have to go hunt down well
why and for me it was
Mercury um decreased activity in your
left prefrontal cortex so when I think
of maybe addd like symptoms in your life
probably coming from there and decreased
activity ity in your left temporal lob
and you right-handed yeah yeah so that
can go with the irritability what I've
seen is that can go with sort of short
fuse and your prefrontal cortex is sort
of the brain's supervisor it watches you
and your prefrontal cortex is flat MH
and I don't like that and then when I
heard you played soccer when I read you
played soccer is very common in my
soccer players now how long did you play
soccer for uh pretty much all of my
childhood and any concussions playing
soccer I think I had a couple of big
headbangs that were significant but not
many not nothing that took me to
hospital but I had a couple of moments
where i' pulled off the pitch because
like there was a clash of
heads so your brain is soft about the
consistency of soft butter your skull is
really hard and has sharp bony
ridges um two or three of those can
impact the rest of your life and nobody
knows about it because nobody looks
right if you went and saw a thousand
psychiatrists say I want to focus better
and have better temper you saw a
thousand psychiatrists two of them would
look at your brain which I think is
insane so the colors here that I'm
looking at the what does the the red and
the green so the color really doesn't
matter here doesn't matter it's the
shape so when I see this hole you don't
have holes in your brain what the hole
means is less blood flow than is optimal
in fact I'm going to show you if you do
what I ask you to do and we scan you 6
months from now that'll be better I have
a program that tells me if you do what I
ask you to do this is what's generally
going to happen and if you don't do what
I ask you to do well this is what it's
going to look like five years from now
10 years from now and you're young if
you get serious about loving and
repairing your
brain your 60s 7s 80s are going to be
amazing because you're going to have a
healthy brain If you go oh Aman's quack
and I don't believe any of this
crap it's going to be really hard for
you because you're not going to have
full access to your
brain and that's scary so I know that's
sort of a big deal but I think this is
from traumatic brain injury at some
point and a bit of a toxin which may
maybe mold mhhm and when I when I say
mold our house was very very dirty
growing up so that's what I assume
you're speaking to there and we did have
like mold around the window sill
sometimes and we had mice and rats at
some point and it was like living in a
house that a hoarder had uh lived in
because some of the rooms were just
stacked to the ceiling with crap
so I think maybe if you're talking about
mold or toxic brain I I I'm guessing
that's where it's come from once it gets
in your body unless you do something
active to get it out it stays really and
can continue to cause problems and then
if we go to the active scan it's very
different than I want it to be and I
know I can make it better but if we go
back to what's
healthy lots of activity in the the
cerebellum your
cerebellum is
Sleepy despite you probably being very
coordinated I need to activate that
thing this is really important to get
better activity there and you have this
diamond pattern so you have ad and we'll
talk more about it it's a subtype I call
overfocused add where you can be
obessive when you're really interested
in something but if it doesn't interest
you it's hard for you to focus
so if you look at this it looks like a
diamond and when I see that
diamond I think of past emotional
trauma and uh I published a big study
looking at there's 20,000 people can I
separate emotional Trauma from physical
trauma and I can with actually high
levels of accuracy and it looks to me
like there's sort of bit of both for you
do you play Rocket Sports no I don't so
that'll be one of my prescriptions for
you and actually study from England
people play Rocket Sports live longer
than everybody else by far soccer was on
the bottom like soccer and football were
on the bottom but tennis table tennis
rocketball now pickle ball uh bad mitton
are on the top but let's talk about this
diamond for a bit when I say emotional
trauma MH what comes up for you so a few
things the first thing is my parents
were always at War growing up as a kid
in a household where there was so much
screaming and negative energy but then
growing up with shame because we was I
was so different from everyone else
around me
never inviting friends back to my house
in those 16 years that I lived there
before I left so nobody really knew
where I lived either I think of all that
stuff when I think about like emotional
trauma well that's a lot okay yeah I
mean if you grow up in a stressful
environment Mo MH in um a hostile
environment where your parents are at
War it trains your brain your emotional
brain to become h active because you
always have to
watch for danger and that gets
programmed early and even later when
there's not the danger your body still
can look for it you're waiting for that
next bad thing to happen and do you
think I have ADHD I do now the question
would be
who has it in your family because it
doesn't just show up but
often children who have ADHD have one or
both parents who have it and you can see
those similar trads
and it sounds like one or both of your
parents could have been a little bit
conflict
seeking my my mother
and if I was to Hazard a guess at which
one of my parents had ADHD and this is
just me guessing not trying to diagnose
my parents I would say it's would have
been my
mother why she's the she's the most
irritable handwriting isn't great she
is a little bit more sort of like SC
scattered I should say she's a lot more
messy my dad's like very organized with
everything my mom's very very very messy
like me um um the the other thing I
would ask
is what did teachers say about you I
went back to speak at my
school to the GCS CNA level students
I've done it twice and I remember one of
the teachers came up to me bear in mind
at this age I'm 24 25 years old and she
said you were a useless student but you
were nice you're a nice person I was
never swearing or throwing chairs but I
was useless and I spent most of the time
in the exclusion unit which is where you
go if you don't do your homework or you
don't attend I just couldn't sit in
classrooms I couldn't sit in classrooms
and stay focused on what they were
telling me es especially when I wasn't
interested that's been like her defining
quality of my life I'm exceptionally
good at not doing things I'm not
interested in and I'm ex and I'm good at
when I'm interested but when I'm not
interested I could see my peers almost
like will themselves to engage in things
that not interested in I'm I will I
could never do that and I've always said
I'm a remarkable quitter so you think
about stopped going to school then went
to University for one day and was like
NOP never went back after that first day
so so it's it's a very important piece
of advice for people who have ADD is
pick something you love not a
job that you think you'll just make more
money in and that's another sort of
piece of the puzzle that completely fits
with having add and as as we know there
are problems with it but there are also
huge benefits of it your preal cortex
when it works too hard so I imagine if I
scanned your dad that it would be busy
because he's very organized and like
collecting um but there's 's less
creativity that goes with the busy
frontal
loes when there's a little bit sleepy
you entertain all sorts of thoughts and
you're a little less rule bound than
people whose prefrontal cortex more
active they like rules and they like
sameness and they like
predictability
and probably like some of that because I
think you inherited some of your dad
that's the top of the diamond
but you're obviously very
creative I do um I do think of myself as
being um a a creative entrepreneur I I
know other entrepreneurs that are like
really good at finance and operations
and processes whereas my skill in
entrepreneurship has always been the
creativity that's why I'm a marketeer
that's where I built my my fortunes per
se was in marketing and creativity So
and I've always found other people to do
the finance or the process or operation
stuff for me because that's not where I
I'm engaged or or where I think I'm
particularly good so well and since a
lot of CEOs listen to this podcast a lot
of CEOs have ADD of one form or
another and they Thrive when they hire
people who are
organized so it's very important CU we
tend to like to hire people like
ourselves and it's very important to
hire people who help us where we're more
vulnerable it's almost like hiring
people with different brains yes
literally
yes we we we talked about something a
second ago you said when you saw your
brain for the first time it changed your
life I do feel like that now I do feel
like when I almost didn't realize my
brain was there and I think a lot of
people we go through our lives just kind
of because we never see the thing we
don't appreciate the thing so step one
is that awareness and then step two is
the realization that we can do something
about it because I grew up thinking that
your brain and your body generally is
just it just is what it is like I can't
do anything about you know I tend to
think I can't do anything about I don't
know my fingernail I probably you can
but you just see these things as static
objects that are what they are
this idea that I can do something about
it is the most important idea it's the
it's the empowering idea and that is
what you're telling
me is possible I can change my brain
it's the most exciting lesson that I've
learned you're not stuck I'm not stuck
with the brain I had you're not stuck
with the brain you have you can make it
better I can prove it in fact every
every day what I've come to believe
you're making your brain better or
you're making it worse let's start there
by what you're doing what things make
the brain worse what are the common
things that most of us do without
thinking that make the brain
worse when my daughter Khloe was in
second grade I went to her classroom and
I wrote 20 things on the board and I
went separate them for me good for your
brain bad for your brain year olds they
got 19 out of 20 right so most people
know the only thing they got wrong was
orange juice they put it in the healthy
category when in fact when is it
rational to unwrap fruit sugar from its
fiber source because it turns toxic in
your body so I'm not a fan of fruit
juice I'm a fan of fruit not fruit juice
but so the bad
category hitting a soccer ball with your
head no don't do that um what's bad
about sugar for the brain
pro-inflammatory
which what does that mean it makes you
diabetic but I mean as it relates to the
brain why is like orange juice or the
ice cream bad for my brain because it's
ultimately going to give you high blood
sugar levels MH which erode your blood
vessels and you're going to have lower
blood flow to your brain that's bad
thing I mean there's so many things
about it so it's addictive it's
pro-inflammatory it makes it more likely
you're going to have diabetes and
obesity so 72% of Americans are
overweight 42% are
obese I've published three studies on
35,000 people as your weight goes up the
actual physical size and function of
your brain goes down that should scare
the fat off anyone I used to be chubby
but when I figured out that connection
I'm like oh no I'm it was that that gave
me the motivation to drop about 25
pounds and so
sugar is the gateway drug to diabetes
and obesity and so not to
mention inflammation which is the cause
of depression and dementia so I've got
sugar I've got head injury I'm going to
avoid both of these things what else
should I avoid and then you have low
blood flow in those two very important
areas and
so how can we increase blood flow so you
want to avoid things that cause low
blood flow caffeine nicotine caffeine
caffeine constricts blood flow to the
brain what does that do to my brain Con
well constricts blood flow so you're
going to get less blood flow and
remember I showed you that progression
with
age no you don't want that you want to
do things that increase blood flow to
your brain so
exercise um genko just one of the
supplements I'm going to give you eat
foods like um beets
oregano Rosemary cinnamon they increase
blood flow
and do you think there's correlation or
a link
between
caffeine consumption and a shrinking
brain
yes and a shrinking brain is that
associated with things like dementia
aging
brain you know I don't think there's a
connection I haven't read any research
that says there's a connection between
caffeine and dementia there's a
connection with sleep problems and
there's connection with sleep problems
in dementia I think if you have like 100
milligram a day of caffeine is probably
fine but one
venty Starbucks coffee has got 330
milligrams of caffeine Jesus and people
just aren't thinking about the level of
caffeine they're having in our society
what are the other very obvious things
that are not good for my brain because I
really want to make sure that I avoid
those things I've got sugar erectile
dysfunction I mean while we're so B is
for blood flow right while we're on
blood flow 40% of 40y olds have erectile
dysfunction 70% of 70y olds have
erectile dysfunction what that means if
you have blood flow problems anywhere it
means they're
everywhere and
so like
No And and it means either you're too
sedentary you're overweight you're
smoking or having too much
caffeine or using marijuana because
marijuana lowers blood flow to the brain
and so just in that one of the
11 it's
exercise
genko for you not for everybody but for
you hyperbaric oxygen those three things
will make a big difference in blood flow
genko genko what is that it's a
supplement what does it do uh increases
blood flow to the brain the prettiest
brains I've ever seen take genko there's
actually a spec study uh they gave uh
people
120 milligrams of genko twice a day
significant Improvement in blood flow to
the
brain and so in one of the supplements
I'm going to give you we have genko I
I've taken it every day for the last 20
years at least and then this is where
the US government got an F for the
pandemic loneliness accelerates dementia
and brain problems and so when they
isolated as the whole significant
increase in brain problems so get
connected to other
people the i in bright Minds is
inflammation so what increases
inflammation
low omega-3 fatty acid levels and we are
deficient 93% of the population is
deficient and omega-3 fatty acids
93% so all of us should be either eating
more fish
or taking an omega-3 supplement like
fish oil gum disease like who knew like
I wasn't really that good at taking care
of my gums until I started Ed reading
the studies you have gum disease you
have inflammation you're more likely to
get depressed and have dementia I'm like
oh my goodness so I'm a flossing fool um
H's head trauma we talked about that I
did the big NFL study when the NFL was
struggling with the truth on traumatic
brain injury in football and 80% of our
players got better TS
toxins um drugs
alcohol um but other things like Mercury
and what are the unobvious toxins
because anesthesia anesthesia I I was
looking at my
bathroom items and I have like mouthwash
and toothpaste and deodorants and after
shaves and I was wondering to myself
whether those were toxic to some degree
so there's an AB there's a couple of
them but the one I like is called Think
Dirty mhm where you can scan those
products and it'll tell you on a scale
of 0 to
10 how bad they are for you so zero is
you live a long time and 10 is you die
early and so when I figured this out and
I scanning everything um I mean it cost
me hundreds of dollars to replace things
and my wife more than that with all the
makeup and stuff but I shaved for 50
years with
barbasol and it's a
nine which is die early and now I shave
with something called kiss my face and
it's a
two it's like you know we teach people
read the labels on food stuff should
read the labels on anything that goes on
your body or on your child's body and we
have this epidemic and we'll get to it
of low testosterone in males because of
the toxins we put on their bodies when
they're young
what is the m in brightness so the m is
mental health
it's the quality of your
thoughts the level of your
stress
and the level of trauma you carry in
your body and whether or not you have
any of
the psychiatric stuff like depression
for example doubles the risk of
Alzheimer's disease in women and
quadruples it in men and so the m is
what's going on in your
mind and so I teach people to kill the
ants the automatic negative thoughts
that steal their
happiness
um
understand and process their
traumas
and
treat
whatever psychiatric issues may be
present like in your case the
ADD and I think we start with a
supplement um or even consider
medication talk about the natural ways
to do it the medicine ways to do it and
for me I'm not opposed to medicine I'm
actually really good at it
but it's never the first and the only
thing I think about I've really never
taken medication in my life even like if
I get a headache I don't take medication
I'm not the type of person I probably
haven't taken a pill in like really in
years the only time I've taken
medication is if I have a severe
infection of sorts so like there was
this one time where like my foot was
going green and I'd stood on some glass
whatever and it was really getting out
of control I'm talking like a 2in purple
thing growing on my foot and I thought
okay instead of getting my leg cut off
I'll take this medication the doctor's
given me otherwise I just do not take it
so I will rather go through severe pain
than take medication because I believe
that my body can fix things um so when I
think about taking ADD medication or
ADHD medication I don't really know the
difference I go
well if my if I'm messy or if I'm my
handwriting's bad or whatever it might
be then that's just who I am and that's
okay I can get better at it I can be
less I can be more organized but why why
do I want to take
medication well I'm not gonna I'm not
going to be the one to sell you on
medication but what I would
say
is so a lot of times people ask me the
side effects of medication MH and for
stimulants for add it could be a
decreases your appetite or con negative
ly affect your sleep but you always have
to ask the second question which is what
are the side effects of not taking the
medicine what's the impact on your life
on your business on your money on your
relationships on your health because
living with untreated add for many
people and maybe not you but for many
people goes with chronic stress because
of the
negative things that tend to go along
with it the dysfunction and for you
you're clearly not
broken but are you
optimized do you have full access to
your own brain and I would argue no and
we can do and we can do better but we
can do it in steps
and ultimately I see my job is giving
people options and then telling them the
pros and cons of each option and then
letting them choose right I mean that's
what good doctors should do it's called
informed
consent um and you know I can just tell
you my experience I told you the story
with my daughter
and I've seen that play out thousands of
times that
people just become more optimized and
it's not necessarily the medicine but
that medicine when it's for the right
brain right the wrong brain it makes
people worse and if you read my book
healing add I talk about the Ring of
Fire ADD so ADD and
ADHD are different terms for the same
thing 1980 the American American
Psychiatric association's DSM Diagnostic
and statistical Manual of mental
disorders I hate that but it's what we
have was attention deficit disorder add
with or without
hyperactivity 1987 God knows for what
reason they changed the name to ADHD
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
basically throwing out half the people
who had it because half the people who
have ADD or ADHD are never for
hyperactive and they don't get diagnosed
because they don't bring enough negative
attention to themselves for parents to
go you have a problem and you're giving
me a problem um so anyway different
names for the same
thing and if you can manage
it by having extra help for the things
you're not good at with
exercise with all of the good habits you
have well that's awesome if you want to
be
10% more focused like I treat this
writer um and she only takes medicine
when she has to get stuff done but she
never takes it when she writes because
she has 16 plot lines going on at once
in her books and she goes no I think it
decreases my creativity a little
bit
interesting because
the the fact that we're
medicating the a brain like
mine I I go is that for professional
optimization because if you just go back
like I don't know a couple hundred years
you go back even further to a time when
we couldn't like read or write there
wasn't computers and all of these things
you you would have had no idea that you
know if you go if you go back far you
wouldn't have been able to tell a really
an ADHD well what I'm trying to you'd be
able to tell their life I mean I have a
patient from Ethiopia and I'm like so
tell me the impact in your culture and
he said the people with severe ADHD get
excluded because they can't be relied on
and the isolation causes great shame and
and pain um and they have no idea it's a
brain thing where does it come from ADHD
or add well it's genetic okay it's
clearly genetic I mean I if I don't see
it in someone's family I think head
trauma and with you I think that's
possible because of soccer um except you
see it in your family um is it a defect
or is it a difference it's a
difference if I if I chose to take a
drug was it like you called it rellin I
think you called the what the so Rin
would be one of the options whatever
drug it was what exactly would it do
under brain scanning to my brain so if I
scan my brain and took the drug what
would you see in my brain well I can
tell you it would activate your
cerebellum okay the bit that was a bit
sleepy it was a bit sleepy and it would
activate your prefrontal
cortex and um it would give your brain
better energy so my first spec scan 1991
a woman she tried to kill herself the
night before I went to the lecture on
brain spec Imaging and then I walked out
of the lecture and she was my new
patient her name was Sandy she tried to
kill herself the night before and as I'm
getting to know her I'm thinking she has
ADD she has an 8-year-old son who has
ADD talked about the genetic connection
she had an IQ of
144 but never finished college and I'm
like how'd you study she said well I
never really did except maybe the night
before a test I'd put on a pot of coffee
stay up all night cramming and then I'd
take the test that's classic ad way of
doing things and I'm like you know I
think maybe you have adult ADD and she
goes oh adults don't have ADD and I'm
thinking I'm the doctor but I'm like how
about if we look at your brain
and and I knew from other work I'd done
that I should do it twice at rest and
concentration and when she tried to
concentrate her brain completely
deactivated turned off like for you
willing did it once but if I had done it
twice probably your brain would be busy
or at rest and then when you try to do
it it would
drop and I put the pictures on uh a
couple of days later I put the picture
on the table in front of her and as I
explained it to
her she started to cry and she said you
mean it's not my
fault and I said having add is sort of
like people who need glasses and I wear
glasses to drive and took my glasses out
put them on and I said people wear
glasses aren't dumb crazy or stupid her
eyeballs are shaped funny and we wear
glasses to
focus said people have ADD aren't dumb
crazy or stupid some of them are the
brightest people I know but their
frontal lobes
deactivate taking the medicine as like
glasses for your frontal loes help you
focus and she did it she was conflict
driven she was always poking her husband
they got into a huge fight which is why
she tried to kill herself she stopped
that she's a better mom she went back
and finished College I mean her life's
it's like your brain with glasses wow my
friends that take medication for ADD say
that to me they say it's like their life
is before and after that moment so I've
you know I completely believe what
you're saying um second ago you said
this phrase when we were talking about
the M which is your mental health and
the impact that has on the development
of a brain that's either healthy or
unhealthy and you said this thing about
you got to make sure you kill the ants
which is killing those negative thoughts
um that's much easier said than
done how does how does someone go about
killing their negative thoughts is there
a process they can go through to do that
yeah it's a habit right and it's not
hard but like any habit you have to do
it repeatedly like over and over and
over and over and over and over
um whenever you have a thought your
brain releases
chemicals whenever you have a bad
thought a sad thought a mad thought your
brain releases a certain set of
chemicals that make you feel bad
immediately your hands get cold they
start to sweat your muscles get tense
you start to breathe erratically and it
all happens
instantaneously whenever you have a
positive thought happy thought a hopeful
thought a loving thought like I'm back
because I love the first time was on the
podcast with you um a completely
different set of chemicals come out and
your hands get warmer drier your
breathing slows down your heart beats in
a healthier and it happens like
immediately people have ADD since we're
talking about that they tend to go more
toward negative thoughts because
negative thoughts are more
stimulating and
uh here's the
exercise whenever you feel sad or mad or
nervous or out of control write down
what you're
thinking and then ask yourself is it
true
is it absolutely true this is a process
I learned from my friend Byron
Katie how do I feel when I have this
thought how do I act when I have this
thought and what's the
outcome of the thought so is it true is
it absolutely
true how do I feel act in the outcome of
the thought how would I
feel if I didn't have the thought how
would I act if I didn't have the thought
what's the outcome of not having that
thought then my favorite part of it is
take the original thought Tana never
listens to me Tana's my wife I've had
that thought
um and then turn it to the opposite T it
does listen to me and then just ask
yourself whether or not that's
true and by directing my thoughts by
managing so rather than being a victim
so many of my patients are victims of
their thoughts until they do the work
right this is one of the things where do
what the FI say write down a hundred of
your worst thoughts take them through
that process and by the time you get to
30 they'll stop bothering
you so if I'm a repetitive negative
thinker or a repetitive positive thinker
does that alone change the shape of my
brain yes and in um my new book change
your brain every day there's actually
pictures of Noel Nelson she was writing
a book called The Power of
appreciation and I had her she wanted me
to scan her while she was appreciating
her brain and it looked
beautiful and I'm like as I'm showing it
to her I'm like you need to come back
tomorrow and I want you to hate
yourself and she goes oh I don't want to
do that I'm like come on you have to
suffer for science I I one we have a
positive scan and then we had a negative
scan and the
negativity dropped her left temporal
lobe her left frontal lobe and her
cerebellum so interesting I mean similar
to what your scan looks like but hers
was way worse I mean it's healthy brain
and then a deactivated brain and that
explained to me athletic slumps it's
like why do people get in athletic slums
because negativity turns off their
cerebellum and they become just a little
less
coordinated
interesting and I'm not a fan of
positive thinking I'm a fan of accurate
thinking with a positive spin so
positive thinking is I can have this
third piece of cheesecake and it's not
going to negatively impact my body or my
brain
like no the don't worry be happy people
die the
earliest of accidents and preventable
illnesses so a lot of people come to me
for anxiety and I'm like so on a scale
of 0 to 100 how much is it I'm like 50 I
said okay our goal is not
zero our goal is 15 I want you to have
enough anxiety you do the right
things somewhat linked to that is a word
used as well which is stress when we're
talking about the m in bright Minds how
to have healthy brains what role does
stress play on our brains stress um
especially chronic unremitting stress so
if we think of the stress you had
growing up um where there was a lot of
fighting it raises a hormone called
cortisol cortisol begins to sh shrank
activity in the hippocampus one of the
major memory and Learning Centers in the
brain so one could at least argue or
postulate your struggle in school was
because your emotional brain was busy
because you were worried about things at
home um it makes it more likely you get
infections it makes
it more likely um that you have Le in
problems and Trauma trauma was the other
word you used which I I thought was
worth diving into um the impact that
trauma has on our brains um and does
trauma show up when you scan someone's
brain can you see it yeah so trauma
shows up is that diamond pattern uh
which is why I as asked you about it
it's your emotional brain anterior
singulate at the top it's the brain's
gear shifter thamus often involved in
mood basil ganglia migdala involved in
anxiety so we often see worry anxiety
and sadness and it shows up as that
diamond pattern that after people do
EMDR a specific psychological treatment
for trauma calms it down and I say
psychological treatment I'm like yeah
but it has biological effects uh it's a
very interesting treatment so I get you
to like first thing write down 10 big
traumas in your life and we'll go after
the wor one first um and have you bring
it up and there's a whole process to it
but have your eyes go back and forth
while you bring it up and it's so
interesting the connections your brain
will make to it but as you process it
you find you're actually less bothered
by it and it's Master for for single
incident traumas like being robbed or
being in a car accident for CR chronic
trauma it takes longer um but it's so
helpful um when I met my wife 18 years
ago um her Ace score adverse childhood
experiences on a scale of 0 to 10 how
many bad things happened to you was an
eight and I was so taken with this woman
and one of my first gifts to her was 10
sessions of EMDR one I wanted to see if
she would like wrestle with her traumas
she went for two years and I'm
absolutely convinced that's one of the
reasons she and I rarely fuss with each
other because we don't trigger each
other and when you talk about trauma
it's not these big tea traumas that some
people sometimes talk of which is you
know when I was young I was fondled by
my uncle for example it can also be an
isolated incident that happened when you
were an adult
absolutely it can be anything that
attacks your sense of safety either
physical or
emotional getting fired is traumatic for
a lot of people um not performing in a
high in an important situation can be
traumatic and that changes the activity
within your brain well it depends on how
strong it is if it was really strong if
is really strong then the activity
centers of your brain would well and
there's one thing we haven't talked
about yet called brain Reserve which is
how healthy was the brain that you
brought into trauma because you can take
two soldiers put them in the same tank
and expose them to the same blast the
same angles everything is the same one
walks away unharmed the other one's
permanently disabled why it's the brain
they brought into the
trauma and so if your mother used drugs
while she was pregnant with you she
decreased your reserve if your mom and
dad fought a lot or they separated when
she was pregnant with you that decreased
your reserve if she gave you bad food if
she neglected you if there was chronic
stress that's
decreasing your Reserve so all of us
have a certain level of Reserve when we
go into that trauma and some people get
post-traumatic growth that they're
actually better after the trauma you
know they make the trauma and makes
something meaningful out of it and other
people have post-traumatic stress where
it
really um causes them to
suffer so I love the idea of brain
Reserve because I'm like always thinking
of boosting mine yeah because then also
when something traumatic happens I'm in
a better place right right like if you
kill the ants if you're ant population
is low my automatic negative thoughts
right yeah so if you're masterful if you
have an ante eater running around in
your head cleaning up the negative
thoughts that all of us have when you go
into that trauma well you're just better
able to deal with it
than if you have an un
disciplined mind that's
infested and there's nowhere in school
that people teach you to kill the ants
we have a foundation called the change
your brain foundation and I love it so
much uh we're dedicated to research
Education
Service but last year we produced this
new course called brain Thrive by five
so it's for preschoolers kindergarten
grade one where we teach kids to love
and care for their brain it's like 30
modules or six to seven minutes long and
six of them aren't learning to kill the
ants and little kids just love that you
don't have to believe every stupid thing
you think and I don't know if you know
but Jerry Seinfeld once said the brain
is a sneaky organ we all have weird
crazy stupid sexual violent thoughts
that nobody should ever here and just
because you have a bad thought doesn't
even mean you believe the thought right
it's not the thoughts you have that make
you suffer it's the thoughts you attach
to that make you suffer I get all sorts
of crazy thoughts and I'm like my brain
is so creative but I don't believe most
of them quick one just want to talk to
you about our sponsor super quick called
LinkedIn jobs hiring is one of the most
important steps in your business and
without good people there is literally
no company trust me I found out along
the way that your business is nothing
without good people you want to be 100%
certain that you have access to the best
candidates available and that's why I
need you to check out LinkedIn jobs
LinkedIn jobs helps you to find the
right people for your team faster and
for free so when I'm expanding any of my
teams in any of my companies I go
straight to LinkedIn and I'd highly
recommend you do the same there are
simple tools like screening questions
which make it easy to focus on
candidates with the right skills and
experience so you can prioritize who
you'd like to interview and hire it's
why small businesses rate LinkedIn jobs
number one in delivering quality hires
versus leading competitors LinkedIn jobs
helps you find the qualified candidates
you want to talk to faster post your job
for free at linkedin.com
doac that's linkedin.com
doac to post your job for free terms and
conditions apply as you'll know this
podcast is sponsored by hure and one of
my favorite products that they've ever
created is that their hu Daily Greens it
actually performed so well when we
released it that it sold out completely
and the only thing I'm back here to say
to you guys is that it's now back in
stock it tastes amazing and it's
actually got 91 vitamins and minerals
and whole food ingredients in one scoop
it's nice not to have to think about
taking lots of different pills and
vitamins in the morning I can just take
this and I know that I'm giving my body
a good dose of all the vitamins and
minerals that it needs every morning
it's a lot better tasting than having to
force down some of the other green
powders I've tried and it's really
reassuring to know that I'm looking
after my body properly unfortunately and
currently this product is only available
in the US so anyone in the USA head to
hu.com to get it before it runs out
again but anyone that's not in the US
and wants it to come to their country
please send me a DM a direct message and
I'll speak to the team at hu in our
board meetings and I'll let them know
that you want it in your country tell me
about the most unhealthy brain you've
ever
seen for a 15-year-old with was Kip
Kinkle he's a 15-year-old boy in
Springfield Oregon who brought weapons
to school got arrested his parents
picked him up from
jail and sometime between 6 o' that
night and 8:00 the next morning he
murdered his mom and dad and then he
went to Springfield thirston High School
in Springfield Oregon and shot 25 people
based on my work they scaned and him for
his trial his brain was so awful like
I'd never seen a 15-year-old that had a
brain so
damaged and his life reflected
it what did you see in his brain it it
was shriveled at 15 at 15 and it's like
okay why well he murdered his mom and
dad so I couldn't get a good history but
he either had
anoxia at Birth lack of oxygen
a severe infection or something was
poisoning his brain it could have been
lad it um could have been an infection I
mean we're talking about M the I is
immunity and infections it's a major
cause of psychiatric problems nobody
knows about
it have you scanned the brains of lots
of psychopaths I have and what do you
see when you look at psychopath so I
published a study on murderers and young
murderers have really low frontal L
function older murderers it's Global low
activity now not all murderers are the
same I have one murderer's brain her
brain actually looked pretty good but
she was in the middle of being abused by
her husband and she murdered him and it
wasn't that irrational you know when you
really know her story um but most brains
are troubled
do you think you could look at a brain
and predict now you should ask me should
you scan presidential candidates
interesting especially now uh what do
you think Donald Trump's brain looks
like well I think if we
scanned President Biden or former
president Trump neither one of them
would be healthy I mean one we talked
about the older you get the less healthy
they are and
um if someone is going to have nuclear
codes shouldn't we know what their brain
looks like and I wrote an oped piece in
2008 when Brock Obama was running
against John McCain arguing for don't
you think we should scan presidential
candidates and yeah I don't think either
one of their brains would be healthy and
that concerns me because I mean what do
we need for our top
politicians judgment
forethought impulse control okay so
pling Devil's Advocate to that if we
started to do that at the very highest
office in the land then that philosophy
might creep down to lower offices in the
land and when you go and try and get a
job at I don't know a restaurant or a
marketing agency it might become the
norm that there's a almost brain
discrimination or brain Prejudice in
play where someone like me they have
their brain scan they go listen this
guy's he's not going to be very good at
focusing it's an interesting question I
have to tell you if you date one of my
children for more than four months I'm
Gonna Get You scanned really I'm gonna
figure out how to do that it's the rule
in my family um and if you have a bad
brain it doesn't mean you can't come
back but are you smart enough to fix it
that would be the question have you done
that well my son-in-law Jesse who I love
his mother has paranoid
schizophrenia I'm like I want to scan
your brain and I have he actually wrote
a book called change Your Brain before
25 and he opens the book with the story
of his scan and him sitting with me he's
6'4 I'm 5'6 and he said he' never felt
so
small
and yeah no that's the rule in my family
I like I said when I met my wife I
really liked her and the first naked
part of her I wanted to see was her
brain and so three weeks into our
relationship I'm like hey you haven't
seen the clinic don't you want to see
the clinic she came I scanned her and
it
passed do you use her brain against
her I bet you do I bet you do no we
spoke to Tana she said you
do you'll telling me there's not been
one time where you've brought up her
brain in a moment of conflict or
arguments not once cuz I will call Tana
I I don't yeah no because you know what
I do and this is this is on par with
killing the ants I do an exercise with
my patients called The onepage Miracle
on one piece of paper write down what
you want Rel and in a very specific way
what do you want your relationships your
work your money your physical emotional
and spiritual health what do you want
and with her cuz she's on the top of my
list I want a kind caring loving
supportive passionate relationship I
always want that I don't always feel
like that rude thoughts come into my
head and if I've slept and I've eaten I
never say them why because it doesn't
get me what I want right and that's not
selfish people go oh but you know what
you want is but what I want is not
selfish it's
good because Hedonism is the enemy of
happiness but happiness is a moral
obligation because of how you impact
other people your brain's so smart but
you have to tell it what you want and
every major business including mine we
have a one-page strategic plan we know
what we want and we know what we're
going to do this quarter and this
year but people don't do that in their
lives and you think they should have
like a life plan every person should
what do you want is your behavior
getting you what you want do you think
the brain almost conspires to make to
fit what you want I the brain once
you're clear on what you want I guess
your actions will change a little bit
and then your brain will change shape to
fit what you said you wanted yes and the
brain is
lazy the
brain does what you allow it to do and
it's habitual I was talking to one of my
patients about this yesterday um because
we were working on his one-page miracle
and he's like you know I could be more
positive and I go it's a habit to be
negative or to be positive which
highways are you building in your brain
positive highways or negative highways
accurate highways or distorted highways
you build that and if you watch the news
they'll become more
distorted because it's yeah in my book
the end of mental illness I did
something it was very fun for me to do I
imagined if I was an evil ruler and I
wanted to create mental illness what
would I do and watching the news I think
it was there's 62 evil ruler strategies
and I think that's like 12 um
because the news is no longer the news
the news is about eyeballs and selling
things and negativity sells if I can
scare you that will sell and so um you
have to be very careful with what you
allow in your brain and yes you should
be informed but not over and over and
over and over again people who start the
day with the news are 27% less happy in
the
afternoon
well I listen to lots of True Crime in
serial killer things like every
day are you telling me it's so funny I
have this show on Instagram called scan
my brain I take influential people and
scan them and I did Megan Trainer uh the
musician I love her music and she goes I
can't sleep and every night before bed
she's listening to True Crime and I'm
like stop that do you think it is cuz I
listen to True Crime before bed I have
this exercise that I recommend to all my
patients I've done it
for 10 years what went well when I go to
bed I start at the beginning of the day
and just go hour by hour looking for
what went right about my day I think
that's set your dreams up to be more
positive I think it's i' do both and
then i' just see which one works better
for you every day win or learn what is
the ey in bright Minds immunity and
infections so do you know your vitamin D
level no but I do take the only
supplement that I've take frequently I'd
say there's two is vitamin D and omega-3
but I've because I'm black as well I you
need more vitamin D so uh people have
darker skin need
an going from Africa where there's a lot
of sun to the UK where there's no sun
dramatically increase the risk of mental
health problems yeah because of vitamin
D deficiencies do you know what I think
there's a certain member of my family
who I won't name who went from Africa
they're they've got two Nigerian parents
went from Africa to the UK and I saw
their mental health deteriorate quite
significantly to the point that we
believe this person might have bipolar
now and I I I part of me suspects once I
learn about vitamin D deficiency in
people that have darker skin this person
has very very very very black skin um
that it might be associated with that
change being in a new country that has
no sunlight for 30 years when you're you
know black black you bet yeah and it's
part of so if you
see mental health as brain health then
that becomes a critical intervention if
you're not paying attention to brain
health then you're like well what
anticho or what mood stabilizer can I
give them and I very well may use an
anticho or a mood
stabilizer but if I get your brain
healthy you might not need it or you'll
need half the dose so and and then
infections I mean we're just coming out
of a
pandemic and coid changes your brain in
a bad way it causes um like a a
inflammatory bomb to go off in your
brain I was on the Kardashian show last
year because I scanned Kendall Kendall
came to see
me and obviously I was on the show so it
was public knowledge and it was postco
and her emotional brain just was on
fire uh and that's what we saw with Co
and long Co emotional brain is hot but
then the cortex begins
to um get low in activity it's it's a
bad combination why what does that mean
it's like chronic damage and what does
that mean if the in terms of behavior
what's the implications for Behavior so
the hot limic brain tense
anxiety that she hadn't had um if you
start damaging your cortex and all of a
sudden you're sad you're impulsive
you're irritable you uh can get dark
thoughts sometimes even suicidal
thoughts and people got coid
significantly increase in
dementia someone who's listening to this
right now that is
depressed clinically depressed um or
just feels you know depressive symptoms
where did you start let's go to the
extreme end someone that can't get
themselves out of bed I sat here with
Jay pinkit and she told me that she was
clinically depressed and she if she just
got to 4 p.m. every day to her that was
a victory there are lots of people out
there that are in that situation right
now where did you start with those
people what advice do you give them
because I'm sure you see a lot of them
in your
practice it starts with awareness yeah
that maybe this is not me maybe it's my
brain mhm and then it starts with loving
your brain and then
investigating your brain because
depression is like chest pain so if you
if somebody's like had chest pain you're
like well where would you start well you
start with an evaluation you wouldn't
start with drugs I mean that would be
like ludicrous you would like go why do
you have chest pain why are you
depressed you know how's your thyroid
right the person that can't get off the
couch they're they could be
hypothyroid or one of my friends got
depressed she had anemia she had
pernicious anemia because it was a B12
deficiency I I wouldn't assume oh you're
depressed take this
medicine depression is what it is it's
not why it is and if you don't know why
it is how do you effectively treat
something like so many people come to me
and they go I have an autoimmune
disorder it's like well why do you have
an autoimmune disorder order why is your
body so mad at you it's attacking itself
and so because my body's
broken but why is your body
broken right and and I I hate the term
broken right the the series like the
broken brain and it's like no it's not
optimized let's optimize it right I
never want my patients to think of them
as mental and I never want them to think
of themselves as broken you're awesome
so how can I help you be maybe 10% more
awesome people feel like their brain is
against them is working against them
when they're feeling depression or those
chronic cycles of negative thinking why
is my brain attacking me why is it
against me so part of it is it's not
healthy and part of it's
undisciplined and I got to do a lecture
last year for the coaching staff of the
Miami Heat it was so much fun for me and
I'm really thinking a lot about Elite
Performance and I think it's just such a
better model it's like let me help you
be your best rather than let me fix you
and and I think someone like you I mean
it's like you're already awesome how can
I make you more awesome how can I give
you more
access to your own brain and it's just
it's easier to sell that than you know
let me give you a diagnosis of a mental
illness
and then let me give you a medicine you
have to take for the rest of your life
this is the wrong model that Psychiatry
is currently operating with really good
for the pharmaceutical industry really
bad for our society 25% of the American
population is on psychiatric drugs
that's just horrifying
is rin a psychiatric drug it is and I'm
not opposed to psychiatric drugs be
really clear I'm actually really good
with them it's never the first and only
thing I think about what is the n in
bright mindes neuro
hormone if your hormones that affect
your brain which are all of
them are not optimal you're not optimal
and the DNS like if
you're um cold when other people are not
we should look at your thyroid the D is
diabesity where your overweight Andor
have high blood sugar it's the most
common of the 11 72% of people are
overweight and as your weight goes
up you have 7 of the 11 risk factors it
lowers blood flow to the brain it
prematurely ages the brain it increases
inflammation it stores toxins it's a bad
thing and then the S is
sleep I've got obsessed with my sleep
recently I have my woop on pretty much
all the time and they're sponsor of this
podcast I probably should say but I'm
also like a equity shareholder in the
company but it's become one of my
biggest obsessions in my life is waking
up in the morning and looking at how I
slept how much deep sleep restorative
sleep I've had my heart rate variability
all that stuff I'm obsessed with it what
does sleep do to my brain I guess you
said earlier that it kind of cleans it
cleans it and refreshes it well we
didn't even know that until I guess was
10 or 12 years ago where researchers saw
that the fluid system in your brain it's
called the glymphatic system doesn't
open up when you're awake but when
you're asleep it opens up and then sort
of cleans things washes things and so
for those people like me who I thought I
was special because I could get by in
four hours of sleep at night I'm sort of
running around with a toxic brain or a
dirty brain and so what are those tox
toxin so what is it cleaning have you
heard of beta ameloid which is a cluster
of proteins that increases your risk of
Alzheimer's disease so they build up
during the day system cleans it but if
you're not getting good sleep you have
more of a toxic buildup of those kinds
of clumping proteins that are
problematic for you
interesting interesting is there
anything else people need to know about
sleep in the brain because I think
everybody knows sleep is important a lot
of people struggle with sleep sleep
apnea triples the risk of Alzheimer's
disease one of the big lessons imaging
has taught me that I can actually see
the pattern for sleep apne on a scan and
it looks like early Alzheimer's disease
it's bilateral parietal top back part of
your brain decreases what is sleep upne
snore loudly stop breathing at night
chronically tired the next day so when
you sleep you're breathing um you have
many apnic episodes where you stop
breathing and so and if you're sleeping
alone you actually might not know it
because no one's being woken up by your
snoring
um and even people who've been diagnosed
with it don't treat it because they
don't want to wear the mask at night and
I'm like no you have to treat it
otherwise the worst thing you can do for
your brain is starve it of oxygen that's
the worst thing you can do for your
brain so breath work then must be quite
good for the brain breath work is good
for the brain um one of my tiny habits I
have many of them for brain health is
the 15sec breath uh 8 seconds in hold it
for a second and a half 4 seconds out
hold it for a second and a half do that
four times eight times it'll break a
panic attack do it on a routine basis
it'll increase your heart rate
variability breath work will breath work
heart rate variability is this metric
that I think Society much of society
have suddenly become quite obsessed with
including me me and my friends literally
have a heart rate very ability contest
every morning where we like screenshot
our high rate varability and drop it
into the chat and some of my friends are
trying to increase theirs one of my
friends called it's my friend called Ash
I mentioned him earlier on his has been
quite low so he's kind of been trying to
get it up um I guess we're goingon to
have to ask two questions here which is
what is h variability and the second
question is how do I improve it in your
view so again you can't change what you
don't measure and now people who wear
Apple watches or AA Rings or devices
that measure it
heart rate variability is the beatto
beat variability of your heart rate and
people go oh well my heart rate should
beat the same well no actually the more
variable it is
BU bum bum rather than bum bum bum bum
bum bum um I first heard about heart
rate variability with babies that when a
baby is being born they actually put a
scalp monitor on it and they look at the
heart rate variability of the baby and
if it's very variable it's bouncing all
over the place well it's a sign of heart
health when it flattens and becomes even
like it's just
70 they go get the baby because that
mean the baby is in trouble doesn't make
any sense ises it it's like
counterintuitive it's a little bit
counterintuitive but if your heart rate
variability is low you have a higher
risk of anxiety depression and heart
disease dying early I mean there's this
huge connection between your brain
health and your heart health and so
meditation increases heart rate
variability breath work increases heart
rate variability exercise can increase
heart rate variability good sleep and
good sleep hygiene can and increase it
ants decrease heart rate
variability I stopped drinking alcohol
for this very reason people don't know
this but I I mean I've probably
mentioned it twice now on air but I quit
drinking alcohol about a month and a
half ago I think and part of the reason
is when I wore my whoop and then I had I
don't know one glass of wine or two
glasses or three glasses of wine the day
before when I woke up the next day my
heart rate variability was like flashing
red it was 30 40 typically on a great
day my heart rate variability is 150
140 which is strong really strong I know
this CU I compete with my friends but on
a day where I had a glass of alcohol
it'd be flashing red and it would be 40
also if I was sick it would be 40 also
if I had a really stressful unslept day
the day before it would also be 40 and
the fact that alcohol was causing my
heart to respond the same as a awfully
stressful unslept day or coid
I thought [__] [__] that and I've so
that's part of the reason I quit
drinking alcohol and now that you have
brain Envy yeah you're going to have a
healthier brain if you keep it away
because alcohol lies to us alcohol lies
to us
alcohol causes damage in the brain
really even a little bit of alcohol
causes damage in the brain it disrupts
something called white matter so gray
matter nerve cell body
white matter nerve cell tracks so white
matter is the highways in your brain
that transmit information and impulses
and even a little bit of alcohol has
been shown to disrupt the white matter
in your brain I don't want anything
messing with the highways in my brain
but I love that you measured it you made
the connection and then you stopped it
it's a sign of intelligent life because
you love
yourself
alcohol because there's a lot of people
that are sat on the fence right now with
alcohol they probably don't have a
really bad relationship with it they're
probably not alcoholics but they kind of
just they have it because society's
constructed in such a way that on a
Friday evening when the waiter comes
over and puts down the wine list you
just go okay whatever that's who I was I
was just on the fence my friend one of
my best friends was an alcoholic so I
understand why he quit because he had
this really dysfunctional relationship
with it that would ruin his life I'm the
type of person that would have one drink
two drinks and then I'd maybe stop I
didn't feel the need to have 3 4 S 19 he
was different and also because of that
there was no adverse consequences in my
life so when I went away with him
recently he's writing a book on um
alcohol and alcoholism he was telling me
about the book and I was going I
personally wouldn't read that book
because I don't feel like I have a
problem with alcohol this was before I
quit so I was like what I would love
from a book this is just me personally
is a book that made the case to people
who are kind of sat on the fence that a
drink or a beer or a glass of wine just
cuz I don't know Society is constructed
in such a way where it's hard to avoid
um but they could go for a mocktail if
someone gave them some performance-based
evidence that alcohol just even a little
bit the the casual drinking actually
matters so this is where you come in
doctor one of my biggest uh Instagram
posts
was I told you
so um the American Cancer Society came
out and said any alcohol increases your
risk of seven different types of cancer
and I've been talking about this for 30
years because I have scans and people
who drink any alcohol have lower
activity than people who don't drink at
all and obviously alcoholics they have
terrible looking brains um don't do that
but you got to ask yourself why and
remember we talked about the one-page
miracle what do you want relationships
work money physical emotional spiritual
health so where does alcohol come in to
that oh well it helps me relaxed well
the 15-second breath will help you relax
but there are no side effects to it that
will increase your heart rate
variability alcohol will decrease heart
rate variability and brain function and
if it decreases brain function it
decreases decision making as a
psychiatrist 30% 40% of the people I see
they initially come to my office because
it's somehow alcohol related bite with
their spouse problems with their kids
whatever I'm so impressed you notice the
difference with heart rate variability
and then you stopped yeah cuz I I'm I'm
off I was offensive with alcohol and
it's crazy Now understand how difficult
it is to stop in our society I was
telling my team I quit and I went for
dinner with a guy called SRX everyone
know SRX he's a DJ sunny and this was a
week after I'd quit sat in the
restaurant the waiter comes over bless
him and he goes here's the wine list I
go I I don't drink alcohol he goes he
goes and gets a bottle of wine and he
puts it next to me and goes this is not
alcohol this is Art I'm going to leave
it next to you just in case you get
tempted and Sunny's Sunny to his credit
is telling this waiter no he doesn't
drink this waight is having none of it
and in that
moment I
understood how difficult it is to quit
in society that we've built where every
social interaction apparently needs to
be fueled by alcohol and if you say no
you're either weird or someone will try
and change your mind or persuade you
otherwise it's just the culture we have
the evil ruler Society I talk that's an
evil ruler strategy the food pushers the
drug pushers the alcohol pushers um for
me I just I look at people like that and
it's like so why do you want me to drink
when I don't want to what's it what's
going on with you yeah and I usually
shut some down um but why interesting
question when you go to a restaurant the
first thing they do is put bread on the
table and ask if you want alcohol
because both of them drop your frontal
loes both of them make it more likely
you're going to order more and spend
more money at the restaurant so the
bread is an investment on their part
because bread gives you a sugar spike a
blood sugar Spike which then pushes
serotonin in your brain and makes you
happy but serotonin drops frontal lobe
function one thing they never tell you
when they give you an SSRI for
depression is oh you're going to become
a little bit more impulsive because it's
going to drop your frontal
loes and then alcohol which also drops
your frontal loes so you'll drop more
cash in the restaurant question then on
this point of
alcohol if I took two people off the
street let's say they do everything in
their lives the same other than what I'm
about to say I gave one of them a casual
drink for the next decade just maybe two
drinks a week three drinks a week for
the the next decade and the other person
was completely sober for the next decade
when you looked at their brain at 10
years time if they were doing everything
the same would you see a difference yes
the person who is drinking two or three
times a week will have less blood flow
in their brain and will that have
changed the shape of their brain yes
it'll be a little bit more shrivel and
then that means their behavior is going
to change as well they'll have a little
bit less impulse control and when you
look at the brain of a little bit less
impulse control when you're doing hard
things like
marriage it's not a good thing or
raising children or managing a business
it's like you don't want a little bit
worse decision sex sex and libido a lot
of people are struggling with their sex
lives getting an erection getting
aroused men and women the brain and
sex I imagine you have people come to
you and go listen me and my wife me me
and my partner me and my husband we've
stopped having sex I've lost my libido
when you hear that and you offer people
advice on libido and sex what is brain
right your sex life gets
better in large part it's about blood
flow and if you're having erectile
dysfunction or low libido um you got to
go well why is what are the risk factors
with that and many of them relate to
what's going on in your brain and I I so
often people go I did everything you
said and my wife's so much happier with
our sex life
um you have to check your hormones I
think that's very important you have to
deal with whatever sexual trauma might
be there um the biggest sex organ in the
body is your brain if there's no
forethought there's no foreplay
and so it's about the decisions that you
make what else do I need to know about
sex if I'm trying to get my partner in
the mood and I'm trying to make them
aroused you know it depends on their
brain okay right so if your partner has
a very busy frontal Lo that part called
the anterior singular gyrus you can't go
come on let's have sex because you've
met people with the automatic know that
no matter what you say they're going to
say the opposite of it or they're going
to fuss with it I mean it's like it's a
nice day today oh no it was nicer
yesterday I mean even simple things so
you want to want to have sex no
um I was at this lecture once and
somebody came up to me at a break and
said you've helped me so
much um I thought my wife just didn't
love me and what I realized is that part
of her brain was just working too hard
so now I ask everything in the opposite
it's like oh like if I wanted to go to
the store she'd never want to go with me
and i' go so now what I do is I go I'm
going to go to the store you probably
don't want to come what do you mean I
don't want to come of course I want to
come he said but doesn't sound right to
say well you probably don't want to have
sex oh I go okay I know her brain do
this and I gave him natural things to
boost serotonin so I said take her out
for a pasta dinner so I'm not a fan of
pasta generally except for these people
take her out for pasta dinner because
pasta increases serotonin then take her
for a walk around the lake because
exercise increases serotonin then give
her a piece of dark chocolate not too
many because if you get her too many
she'll have no need for you
but dark chocolate has pea in it fenoy
means that alerts your brain that
something fun is about to happen and
then put on a little baby powder because
baby powder it's been shown
scientifically is a natural aphrodesiac
for women because what do women
unconsciously associate to baby powder
babies and unconsciously they want one
and
then rub her back and don't ask for
anything directly and from about day
four to about day 18 of her menstrual
cycle you're likely to get lucky why
from day four to day 18 because she's
the last week of a woman's menstrual
cycle especially people who have this
brain type tend to be more irritable is
that before their period it's before the
period okay so the week before their
period is when she two weeks before
their period is generally the best time
do men and women have different brains
significant wildly so so this whole
thing about you can't put your gender on
your medical forms is just insanely
stupid uh because gender matters like
estrogen and testosterone they matter
when it comes to brain function I
published a study on
46,000 scans looking at the differences
between male and female brains and
they're wild uh uh women have much
better frontal loes function much better
blood flow to the front part of their
brain which makes them which makes them
good leaders if you think of impulse
control and collaboration and
communication and the one statistic that
just hammers this home is who goes to
jail men 14 times more than women but
women get depressed twice as much as men
because their limbic or emotional brain
is much busier than the male brain and
that's why in every um Human Society
women are primary caretakers for
children um women have a bigger nesting
Instinct so I told you we moved recently
and moving is much harder on women in
general than it is in men because they
feel like they lose their nest and they
have to redo their nest and I was an
Army psychiatrist for seven years and I
used to always tell the guys I'm like
when you move you stay home and help her
put the house together because she's
going to be way happier uh for you on
that impulse control but I remember
reading the statistics that men suffer
with gambling addictions and betting
addictions significantly more than women
drug addictions alcohol ad five times
more than women um but women get
help because they're not afraid to ask
for help where for men it's often a
macho thing it's like there's nothing
the matter with me which is why women
attempt suicide three to four times more
than males but males kill themselves
three to five four times more than women
do because men use more violent means
and men aren't communicating
I'm in
trouble saas SAA an exercise on the
brain good good for the
brain so I'm a huge fan of saunas uh
because of the studies mostly from
northern Europe people take the most
saunas have the lowest incidence of
Alzheimer's disease and I told you about
my Mercury detoxing is really important
and you can detox in a lot of different
ways but sauna is one of the most
effective ways um exercise is you want
to stay young walk like you're late if
you're 80 and you can walk three miles
an hour you have a 90% chance of living
until you're 90 if you can only walk a
mile an hour you have a 90% chance
you're not going to live until you're 90
so exercise boosts blood flow it
increases uh brain Dr dve neurotrophic
Factor it increases serotonin increases
dopamine um another interesting thing is
should you do cold plunges because cold
plunges have been found to fairly
dramatically increase dopamine so you
should do cold plunges not if you have
heart problems so if you have heart
problems I wouldn't do that but if you
have inflammation if you have pain if
you tend to be depressed there's
evidence cold plunges can be
helpful what about weight in the
brain when you look at someone who is
clinically obese and you look at their
brain what do you see and if I'm trying
to lose weight what do I need to know
about the
brain you know I've thought a lot about
this because I have obesity in my family
um as your weight goes up the size and
function of your brain goes
down and that's horrifying
fine people who are and our society is
against us I mean you just I wrote a
book called The Brain Warrior way and I
argue you're in a war for the health of
your brain everywhere you go someone's
trying to shove bad food down your
throat that will kill you I can see the
emotion in your face when you say this
yeah uh it's just horrifying you know to
think of Carl's Jr that'll take these
you know Charlotte McKinna or Katherine
Webb these beautiful women and have them
eat cheeseburgers and it's unconsciously
people are like if you eat those Burgers
these women will want you well these
women have spit buckets on those SATs
where every time they take a bite they
spit it out because they never have
those bodies if they ate that food we
are being
manipulated and it is causing what I
think is one of the greatest epidemics
ever uh obesity and as you're
overweight lower blood flow aging
inflammation stores toxins makes you
feel awful about
yourself takes healthy testosterone we
talked about you know why the low takes
healthy testosterone and turns it into
unhealthy cancer promoting forms of
estrogen it's just a disaster what's
happening I think
you have to start counting your calories
and you know I run up against all sorts
of scientists go calories don't count
it's complete crap now the quality of
your calories is just as important but
don't eat more than you need and we live
in a society where we're eating way too
much and people don't know if you think
of the Cheesecake Factory and these
monster portions it's like that's insane
um and it's a big thing that changed but
the Obesity epidemic really started as
the US government uh among others
demonized um
fat everything became low fat in the 80s
low fat low
cholesterol
and they put sugar in things to replace
it in fact it just came out recently it
was in the 60s that some of the sugar
companies paid scientists to say it's
fat not sugar and it damaged millions of
people last thing I wanted to ask you
about is well there's really two
outstanding questions that I have for
you Doctor the first one is about screen
time people want to know does screen
time this generation that have grown up
11 hours a day on a screen or social
media up to 11 hours a day According to
some studies does that have an impact on
my brain it does it shrinks it it's sad
I mean what it does is it wears out your
pleasure centers so you have these two
areas in your brain called the nucleus
accumbens and they respond to dopamine
and they bring you happiness and they
bring you pleasure and they bring you
motivation and they bring you
drive
and when you're hitting
them like every buzz on your phone every
notification every time you scroll and
you like something you just got a little
hit of dopamine well the more you do it
pretty soon you thrill them to death you
begin to wear out those pleasure centers
and if let's just take Fame for example
I've been blessed to see Justin Bieber
and Miley Cyrus and a whole bunch of
really fascinating cool people who been
really depressed it's like how can you
be depressed you're Justin Bieber or how
can you believe you're not enough right
because their pleasure centers get worn
out by being noticed over and over and
over again well when you allow that in
your brain the screen time three and a
half hours if you're on for three and a
half hours a day you have an increased
risk of anxiety depression addiction
obesity ADHD and our society's on way
more than that and you go so why are we
having this
epidemic of uh teenage suicide and
mental health problems especially in
teenage girls social media it's one of
the big issues of the day and not only
are you wearing out your pleasure
centers you hate yourself because you
think everybody's better than you are
it's the comparison dragon that is
damaging
you my last question is about happiness
which we're talking about
there I spoke to I think it was tally
shot that told me happiness takes on
this kind of interesting Arc throughout
our lives where at the start of Our
Lives we're a little bit happier then in
the middle of our Lives we're little bit
sadder and then as we age we go back
into being happy now I was contrasting
that information to what you said about
how the brain Withers with age if the
brain is withering with age then how
come a lot of of neuroscientists think
that happiness resembles this kind of U
shape in our lives where in the middle
of our Lives we're less happy the start
and the end we're more
happy that's a great
question we're less
striving as we age right so after 65 70
we've sort of done much of the hard
things that we need to do and so
depression also goes up with age too and
obviously dementia goes up with age so I
think it's because I don't have to
accomplish things which makes the middle
part so hard so we're more satisfied
with the nature of Our Lives because
we're not trying to well if if we are
right if if we're not then that becomes
a problem and increases the risk of
depression
it's complicated though isn't it because
you know you get older you probably have
less connections as well so that's a
confounding factor and yeah so I
wouldn't I mean I I I have seen that
research and I wrote a book on
happiness uh because you know when I
write a book it'll take me six to nine
months to write it and I'm like so what
do I really want to think about for this
next six to n months and I loved it
because
like negative thinking is a bad habit is
happiness is also a habit and when I go
to bed and I go what went well today I'm
feeding happiness or throughout the day
if I look for the micro moments of
happiness you know what's the smallest
thing that's going to happen today
that's going to make me happy then I'm
just
happier I I hear all of this and I read
all of this in your books and one of the
things I've really taken away personally
is because I have so much information
what I need to do is select a couple of
these habits and basically put them into
my calendar like you talked about the
breath work and you talked about the
Gratitude exercise at night and those
kinds of things what I need to do is get
a couple of them and just insert them
into my calendar because you know if
they're not scheduled they probably
won't happen in their life as busy as
mine so as well as making small sort of
changes to the you know maybe dietry
things or water or whatever it might be
drinking a little bit less caffeine I've
already quit alcohol make sure I focus
on my sleep
some of these I want to make routines in
my life so that's what I'm going to do
that's what I'm going to take away from
this we have a closing tradition on this
podcast where the last guest leaves a
question for the next guest not knowing
who they're going to be leaving it for
and the question that's been left for
you is quite perfect I think what have
you changed your mind about in the last
decade well the first thing that comes
to my mind is this
idea that I got from Dennis prick
which is happiness is a moral
obligation I never thought of it that
way I grew up Roman Catholic that idea
was nowhere in my family it was nowhere
in the Catholic school I went to and and
I'm grateful for my education uh and I'm
grateful for my
faith but it was about should
and
shaming rather
than
elevation and the fact that happiness is
a moral
obligation there's this video that
Dennis prer produced that I just love
called why be
happy
and and I never
thought
that how I
feel influences everybody around
me that if I'm
unhappy that's not just about me that's
about everybody I come in contact with
so working on
myself is the most loving thing I can do
for other
people Daniel G
amen thank you so much thank you for an
amazing conversation and also thank you
for taking the time to look at my brain
um and you're totally right now that I
have the awareness that that brain even
exists having seen it it's almost like I
feel like it's like a Pablo my dog I now
feel a responsibility to take care of it
and I think that that coupled with
everything that you've imparted on me
about the fact that I can do something
about it for me is life-changing and you
know I I could have sat here all day and
read tens of thousands of comments that
I saw online um about the work that
you're doing to help people live happier
healthy healthier lives and the
consequence that has for Generations I
think is maybe the most special thing of
all because if you can tilt someone's
brain in a better Direction you're not
just tilting their brain in a better
Direction you're tilting generations to
come um of brains in a better Direction
and that alone will tilt Society in a
better Direction and that's exactly the
work that you're doing so I know we
talked about your father last time
around
um you know often times we don't get the
praise from uh our parents that I guess
we we always longed for but I really
hope you understand how proud everyone
is of you all the patience that you've
invested time and love and energy in all
the people that listened to this show
that were tilted in a better Direction
because of you and me as well my life's
been tilted in a better Direction
because of you so thank you thank you so
much what a
joy
[Music]
oh